

# Detection of the Milky Way reflex motion due to the Large Magellanic Cloud infall

Michael S. Petersen

Institute for Astronomy, University of Edinburgh, Royal Observatory, Edinburgh, UK. "Centre for Statistics, University of Edinburgh, School of Mathematics, Edinburgh, UK. "These authors contributed equally: Michael S. Petersen, Jorge Penarrubia. "The Large Magellanic Cloud is the most massive satellite galaxy of the Milky Way, with an estimated mass exceeding a tenth of the mass of the Milky Way". Just past its closest approach of about 50 kpc, and flying past the Milky Way at an astonishing speed of 327 km s\({}^{-1}\) (ref. [10]), the Large Magellanic Cloud can affect our Galaxy in a number of ways, including dislodging the Milky Way disk from the Galactic centre of mass". Here, we report evidence that the Milky Way disk is moving with respect to stellar tracers in the outer halo in a direction that points at an earlier location on the Large Magellanic Cloud trajectory. The resulting reflex motion is detected in the kinematics of outer halo stars and Milky Way satellite galaxies with accurate distances, proper motions and line-of-sight velocities. Our results indicate that dynamical models of our Galaxy cannot neglect gravitational perturbations induced by the Large Magellanic Cloud infall, nor can observations of the stellar halo be treated in a reference frame that does not correct for disk reflex motion. Future spectroscopic surveys of the stellar halo combined with Gaia astrometry will allow for sophisticated modelling of the Large Magellanic Cloud trajectory across the Milky Way, constraining the dark matter distribution in both galaxies with unprecedented detail.

Numerical simulations that follow the accretion of a massive Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC) into our Galaxy predict that the Milky Way (MW) disk will be displaced with a speed of \(v_{\rm med}\approx v_{\rm med}(M_{\rm LMC}/M_{\rm MW})\) relative to the initial Galactic barycentre". If true, the disk motion should be detectable in the apparent kinematics of halo stars with long dynamical times as a simple dipole1. The peak of the blue-shifted velocities, or, is the direction towards which the MW disk is currently travelling. Here, we measure the direction (\(\ell_{\rm~{}gev}\), \(b_{\rm geo}\)) and the magnitude (\(v_{\rm med}\)) of the disk motion by applying a Bayesian analysis of proper motions and radial velocities of hundreds of bright, distant stars in the smooth MW stellar halo: K giants, blue horizontal branch (BHB) stars and the MW satellites, each with individual 6-dimensional position-velocity information[11, 12, 13]. Distant tracers have long dynamical times and are thus slow to react to the gravitational pull of the LMC1. Because the MW disk moves in response to the LMC, but the outer halo does not, a reflex motion arises as a global kinematic pattern on the sky: the distant halo appears to move relative to the MW disk, when in fact it is the MW disk moving relative to the distant halo stars, an effect akin to the apparent motion of rain drops seen from a car driving through a downpour.

Footnote 1: https://www.astro.washington.edu/~pulsar/

In Fig. 1, we show the on-sky probability density function for the direction of the MW disk travel imprinted in the kinematics of each of the three halo tracers (\(\ell_{\rm~{}gev}\), \(b_{\rm geo}\)), against a backdrop of RR Lyrae stars[14, 15, 16]. All three tracers return consistent values at the 67% confidence level (Table 1). Strikingly, the apex direction is not pointing towards the present-day location of the LMC on the sky, but rather along its historical trajectory across the MW. This implies that, as the LMC approached its current location with great speed, the MW disk was not able to keep up. As a result, the MW disk appears to be travelling in the direction of the LMC at some earlier point on its trajectory, as indicated by the plane of the LMC orbit (dashed curve). A similar effect is observed in the numerical models that follow the accretion of the LMC onto the MW (Supplementary Information).

In Fig. 2, we show the probability density function of the magnitude of the disk motion \(v_{\rm travel}\) derived from each of the studied tracers. The strongest constraint is provided by the K giant stars, with \(v_{\rm travel,K giants}=35^{+5}_{-5}\) km s\({}^{-1}\). Being the most numerous bright tracers in our data sample and having accurate proper motions out to large Galactocentric distances (Extended Data Fig. 1 and Supplementary Information), these stars currently provide the best kinematic targets of the outermost halo. The full phase-space information also allows for removal of major substructure in the halo (Extended Data Fig. 2). BHB stars and satellites return slightly less constraining measurements of the reflex motion, \(v_{\rm travel,BHB}=26.^{+1}_{-9}\) km s\({}^{-1}\) and \(v_{\rm travel, satellites}=55^{+23}_{-4}\) km s\({}^{-1}\), respectively. All three datasets are consistent at the 67% confidence level (Table 1 and Extended Data Fig. 3). Fitting the combined sample of BHB and K giant stars yields \(v_{\rm travel,combined}=32.^{+4}_{-4}\) km s\({}^{-1}\). The substantial reflex motion and location of the apex is consistent with a massive LMC falling in for the first time. To test our Bayesian fitting technique we use mock datasets of the stellar halo drawn from numerical models of the MW-LMC interaction (Extended Data Fig. 4 and Supplementary Information). The magnitude of the reflex motion observed in the stellar halo of the MW is consistent with numerical models where the infall mass of the LMC is greater than \(10^{11}M_{\odot}\) (where \(M_{\odot}\) is the solar mass; see Extended Data Figs. 5, 6 and 7), which is much larger than the mass enclosed within its luminous radius, \(M_{\rm lost}\)(\(<\)8.7 kpc) \(\simeq\) 0.17 \(\times\)\(10^{11}M_{\odot}\) (ref. [10]), suggesting that the LMC fell in surrounded by an extended dark matter halo.

Our results complicate theoretical studies of the MW stellar halo and firmly indicate that our Galaxy cannot be treated in dynamical equilibrium. In addition, Earth observes must correct for non-inertial effects introduced by the MW disk motion when translating velocities measured in a heliocentric frame into a coordinate system whose origin is at the Galactic centre of mass. Although corrections from the solar reflex are commonly applied, the reflex motion of the MW disk has so far been neglected in dynamical studies of distant objects. Failure to properly treat the LMC infall may bias measurements of various quantities, such as the total mass of the MW[14]. The measurements presented here, constraining both the amplitude and direction of travel of the MW disk, will help to